The banded broadbill (Eurylaimus javanicus),  is a species of bird in the family Eurylaimidae.
It is found in Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Its natural habitat is subtropical or tropical moist lowland forests. It is a large broadbill (21.5–23 cm), with purple, yellow and black plumage. It eats predominantly insects, including grasshoppers, crickets, katydids, various beetles, caterpillars and larvae.


== Taxonomy and systematics ==

The banded broadbill was described as Eurylaimus javanicus by the American naturalist Thomas Horsfield in 1821 based on specimens from Java. It is the type species of the genus Eurylaimus, which was created for it. The generic name Eurylaimus comes from the Ancient Greek ευρυς (eurus), meaning broad, and λαιμος (laimos), meaning throat. The specific name javanicus comes from Java, the island on which it was discovered. Banded broadbill is the official common name designated by the International Ornithologists' Union (IOU). Other common names for the species include Javan broadbill. The species is called takau rimba in Malay and Nok Phaya Paak Kwaang laay leuang in Thai.The banded broadbill is one of two species currently placed in the genus Eurylaimus, in the Asian broadbill family Eurylamidae, a family of nine tropical species native to Southeast Asia. Based on a 2017 study by the Brazilian researcher Alexandre Selvatti and colleagues, its closest relative is the black-and-yellow broadbill. These two species are most closely related to a clade formed by the black-and-red and silver-breasted broadbills, and all three genera form a sister clade to the genus Sarcophanops. This clade is sister to one formed by the long-tailed broadbill and dusky broadbill. Both of these clades are sister to the Grauer's broadbill. The following cladogram shows phylogenetic relationships among the Eurylaimidae, based on the above study:
Four subspecies of the banded broadbill are currently recognised by the IOU:
E. j. pallidus Chasen, 1935: Found from southeastern Myanmar to Vietnam and the Malay Peninsula. Populations from the northern Malay Peninsula are sometimes  separated as E. j. friedmanni.
E. j. harterti van Oort, 1909: Found on Sumatra, the Riau Archipelago, Bangka Island, and Belitung. The population from Belitung was previously recognised as E. j. billitonis, but this is not generally accepted anymore. It is larger than the nominate subspecies, with light blue-green irises, darker underparts, a more reddish upper back, and pink vent.
E. j. javanicus Horsfield, 1821: Also known as the Javan broadbill, it is the nominate subspecies and found on Java.
E. j. brookei Robinson & Kloss, 1919: Found on Borneo and the northern Natuna Islands.
All the subspecies excluding javanicus are sometimes split as a separate species, which would make the current species monotypic (having only one subspecies).


== References ==